---
title: "Discounts on variable priced goods mean nothing"
date: 2023-06-25
---

Outline

1. Subscription services offer the ability to discount Uber Eats orders or Uber rides.
2. These promise a 5% discount, or free delivery or something similar.
3. You pay a fixed cost per month, in this case $10.
4. Naively, to calculate if this is worth it, you could consider how much you spend in a
   month, and consider whether you would earn more or less.
5. This seems correct, but is actually not a good way to make the decision.

You've probably seen someone get excited by a deep discount, even if the price
after the discount is just a normal price for that type of item. The seller is
anchoring you to the higher, "original" price, and you get to feel like you are
"earning" the difference between the high price and the discounted price.

The fundamental problem is that you are _discounting a variable cost_. Every time you log
onto the app, Uber makes up a price for your ride or .


To a first order approximation, the amount of utility you get out of the
membership is _not_ the amount you save, but the amount they _tell you_ you
save. This is _not_ the same thing as the amount you actually save. Uber is
working overtime making you feel you are saving a lot of money, while taking the
most money from your pocket as they can. You're a happy customer, but not a
rational one.


Uber charges the most they think you'd pay. Your enrollment in a taxi subscription
is giving them a costly signal that:
1. You have some sort of preferential attachment to Uber
2. You have some recurring need for rides
3. Therefore, you will probably pay Uber more for your rides

A reasonable prior here is that every time you Uber with the discount, the mark up
the cost of the ride 5% before marking it down. However, since you are providing
your costly signal, you should assume they will increase your prices even more than 5%.

Anecdotally, I had an UberOne membership for roughly a year. Since leaving the program,
my rides are generally somewhat cheaper, and occasionally substantially cheaper
than other people. Before Ubering in a group, we will all take out our apps
to see how much they are charging us, and then we will take the lowest-cost ride.
Without Uber One, I have seen my rides be 40% cheaper than other people in the group,
even when people in the group do have Uber One.
