Drivers entering lower Manhattan will be charged a congestion fee starting next
year. The tax will be between $9 and $23 per vehicle and will ostensibly help
alleviate traffic between 60th Street and the southern tip of the island.

Even if you don't own a car, you will still pay the tax indirectly. Most
groceries and Amazon orders are trucked in from New Jersey. Lyfts, Ubers, and
cabs will be pricier.

Unfortunately, I don't think the tax will alleviate congestion. **Most traffic
in Manhattan is not caused by the _number_ of cars but by the carelessness of
their drivers.** Drivers routinely block lanes or even entire streets by
stopping inappropriately.

The Manhattan grid has 60-foot-wide streets running roughly East-West, and
100-foot wide avenues running roughly North-South. Between the streets and the
avenues, the streets are the bigger culprit of traffic. They are poorly
utilized. Despite having the potential to support 3 lanes of traffic, only 1 is
actively used. The other 2 lanes are used for parking, garbage containers, and
restaurant sheds.

The 1 *actively* used lane easily gets blocked. The most common reasons are cabs
picking up and letting out passengers and trucks delivering to local businesses.
Everyone has seen a garbage truck crawl across a block with a parade of cars
stuck behind it. This is particularly problematic when the trucks are scheduled
to collect trash during rush hour; I see a sanitation truck cause 8 AM buildups
on 53rd Street every week.

The avenues fare slightly better since most of them have 5 lanes. 2 are used for
 parking or restaurants, just like the streets. However, spillover from the
 easily-blocked streets can halt avenues and quickly create gridlock.

The most heinous stop I've seen caused a 2-hour slowdown through all of SoHo,
across the Holland tunnel, and into New Jersey. A woman parked her car on I-78
and stood in an adjacent lane, talking on her phone. I have to assume the car
was stuck, but the fact that she was on her cell phone outside, blocking another
lane, was entirely out of pocket.

Drivers usually make these traffic-causing stops out of necessity rather than
convenience: there is no good place to make necessary stops without blocking
traffic. But it doesn't have to be this way: you can imagine reserving the last
2 parking spots on every street as a stopping zone. That would be the only zone
where you can do deliveries, wait to pick up passengers, or pull over after a
fender-bender. That would significantly speed up traffic, in my view.
